Let us talk, so far we've been talking
about JavaScript in the browser.
And we've been getting a lot of great life
lessons about all of the many things that
are happening in the browser
that are not JavaScript and
the fact that JavaScript
is typically client side.
JavaScript is running within that
whole magical universe of mystical,
incantations, and event loops and
built in API's and so on and so forth.
But, That was 1995 JavaScript when
JavaScript only lived in browsers.
And now, in 2023, or
whatever year it [LAUGH] happens to be,
in 2023 Very JavaScript
lives all over the place.
And, so that is where our,
our friend who you may be acquainted
with already, Node.js comes in.
So Node.js, lets us do some JavaScripting
without that browser context of
all of the magical, wonderful, thank
you browsers, things that are going on.
So, [COUGH] Node.js some
folks have maybe written and
worked with node before and
used it, but just as a review.
So, [COUGH] Node.js,
which you can read all about in like
thousands of blog posts on the internet.
Is essentially,
In an attempt to allow us to run
JavaScript, which again was developed as
a language to run inside of the browser
to do things without a browser.
So to do things on the server-side,
or perhaps not even on a server, but
command line tools and things like that.
So it's a way for us to take our
skills as JavaScript developers and
bring them outside of
the client side environment and
into all kinds of other places.
And so, one downside of that is
like all those awesome built in
browser things that we've now kind
of gotten used to working with.
If we're not in the browser anymore,
we don't have all the browser magic and
all of those built-in APIs and
all of those things.
But one of the upsides is that node
has its own things that the browser,
you know, may or
may not provide in terms of things that.
For example, will give us access to
the underlying system the user's,
operating system, file system,
all this stuff, right?
When we're outside of the browser,
we don't have that layer of kind of
indirection of talking to the outside
environment of the user's computer.
So it's a trade off, right?
We're, we're losing some of
the browser front end convenience, but
we're also gaining some cool things
that we can't do client side.
And [COUGH] there is a fair bit
of the some of the most commonly
used browser conveniences that make
JavaScript go like the event loop.
That have been sort of
re-implemented in node.
So node has its own event loop so
that we can still use the mental model
of [COUGH] asynchronous JavaScript,
and events firing, and all of that.
Even though we're not talking
about browser events necessarily.
And there's also implementations of
things like set to timeouts, right,
which now the underlying implementation
is gonna look different than set timeout
in the browser.
But we'll still be able to use
some of those same features and
whatnot because node has re-implemented
them for us, essentially.
And so, and just a note in terms of the
engine that's running, so we talked about
how there's different JavaScript engines,
like V8, like SpiderMonkey.
So V8 is essentially what's
powering the JavaScript in node.
And so that is where you will often,
like when it comes to diving deep on the
performance of node and things like that.
Often you'll end up needing to learn
more details about V8, so good to know.
Hope we all like drinking our vegetables.
All right, so,
do folks have node installed?
If you already do, fabulous.
Maybe check what version you're running
and make sure you've got the latest LTS.
Which I wanna say is 2010 at the time
of filming, but I'm not sure, so check.
And you can download this,
if you don't have it, from nodejs.org.
I think it will very helpfully immediately
point you to [LAUGH] the downloads for
your particular system.
So, if you don't have it at the moment,
it's a great time to go to nodejs.org.
Grab that download and
get it installed on your system and
it's usable on Mac, Windows,
Linux, all of the things.
So there is a node for you.
So you know that you have
node if at the command line,
you can type the node command.
And it knows what you're
talking about [LAUGH].
And so, for example,
there's a version flag that you can
use to check which version you have.
And if you just type node without anything
else, you'll get an interactive rebel.
Read evaluate print loop
of JavaScript that's sort
of similar to the console in the browser.
That lets you do quick checks of, like,
does that thing have a this thing?
And the type that we've
been doing in the console.
Okay, so we're gonna be switching
gears here to stop looking
at such an elaborate thing.
We could be looking at
the terminal in VS Code, but
we're just gonna look
at a terminal Window.
And so
now we're gonna enter the command line,
world where we're gonna be doing a bunch
of things from our command line.
Now, is that the only way
to interact with node?
Is that the only way to interact with
some of the tools that we're gonna be
using today?
No.
But it is most common and like in terms
of the documentation that you'll find for
all kinds of tools out there and
libraries and whatnot.
They're basically all gonna give you
commands to run at the command line, so
we're gonna do this here.
And yes,
you can open a terminal in VS Code to
do this if you prefer to have that.
But I'm just in my computer's
terminal saying, all right,
so let's make sure that I
have node cuz honestly.
Who knows at this [LAUGH] point?
[LAUGH] So yeah, so
I just type node and here we are.
So for example, one of the things
that node has reimplemented for
us is a console.
Cuz remember how the console and
the document all of that
stuff was on the Window.
Well, we don't have a Window, so luckily
the [LAUGH] developers have do not have,
like, reimplemented
a lot of the wheel here.
Or whatever that saying is that
allow us to do our good old friends,
like log hello, world to the console.
And just like in the browser console,
we get hello world and
then the return value which is undefined.
So and I can control C to get out of
my twice to get out of my rebel here.
And we're probably not gonna spend
a ton of time in that rebel but
it is a nice way to just
quickly run a line of code.